feat: EVM emulator docs (#333)
matter-labs/zksync-docs: content/20.zksync-protocol/20.contracts/31.evm-emulator/03.evm-differences.md

---
title: Differences Between the EVM Emulator and Ethereum
description:
---
::callout{icon="i-heroicons-exclamation-triangle" color="amber"}

> Given that the EVM Bytecode Emulator runs on top of EraVM, the same limitations and differences detailed in

Reviewer: This is misleading, only part of limitations is inherited

These differences affect gas accounting, opcode support, system behavior, and contract deployment.

This page outlines the key differences between the **EVM Emulator on ZKsync** and **Ethereum (Cancun)**.

## General Differences

- **Gas accounting uses EraVM gas units (ergs) instead of EVM gas.**
- **`JUMPDEST` analysis is simplified.** The emulator does not check whether `JUMPDEST` appears inside a `PUSH` instruction.
- **EVM contract creation does not charge additional gas for initcode size** (`2 gas per 32-byte chunk` from
  [EIP-3860](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3860) is omitted for EOAs and EraVM contract deployers but applied for EVM-to-EVM deployments).
- **Call stack depth limit is not explicitly enforced.** Instead, it is naturally constrained by the `63/64` gas forwarding rule.
- **EVM access lists (EIP-2930) are not supported.**
- **Warm/cold storage logic differs.**
  - Only contracts accessed within the EVM execution context are considered warm.
  - Access from EraVM does **not** affect EVM warm/cold storage tracking.
- **Contract storage is not cleared on deployment.** Unlike Ethereum, storage in newly created contracts is not explicitly reset.

> - **EVM gas refund mechanisms are not implemented.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **EVM gas refund mechanisms are not implemented. We use our own gas refunds in EraVM.**
```

- **Intrinsic gas costs differ from Ethereum.**

> - **Contract deployment failures increment nonces.** This matches Ethereum behavior but differs from EraVM,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Failed deployment of a contract by another contract increments nonce.** This matches Ethereum behavior but differs from EraVM,
```

  where failed deployments do not affect the nonce.
- **Nonce storage uses `u128` instead of `u64`.**

## Gas Limit Behavior

> - The **`GASLIMIT` opcode returns EraVM batch limits in ergs**, not the Ethereum gas limit.

Reviewer: Let's say it returns meaningless value

> - **Gas costs differ across opcodes.** Since EVM execution is emulated, each EVM instruction

Reviewer: This is confusing. **EVM** gas costs for opcodes are the same as in EVM

Author: Good catch. I'll remove the second bullet point, given that this section is about gas limit and that we mention the the higher costs of emulation in other places.

  requires multiple EraVM instructions, increasing overall execution costs.

## Unsupported opcodes

Some opcodes like CALLCODE, SELFDESTRUCT, BLOBHASH and BLOBBASEFEE are not supported
on the EVM bytecode emulator as they're not supported on EraVM.

> Check [the list of unsupported opcodes](../../differences/evm-instructions)

Reviewer: I'd rather list unsupported opcodes here, without this link. That [page](https://zksync-docs-staging-5eb09--pr333-feat-emulator-hcwmu4nw.web.app/zksync-protocol/differences/evm-instructions) is overloaded with info which is not really relevant for the emulator

Author: Ok, given that we link to the EVM instructions page in the callout at the start of the page, I think it's ok to just list the 4 unsupported ones.

## Precompiles

Some precompiles like `RIPEMD-160` and `blake2f` are not supported on the EVM bytecode
emulator as they're not supported on EraVM.

> Check [the list of available precompiles](../../differences/pre-compiles)

Reviewer: We need to add Identity precompile to the list of available precompiles

Author: added
